.Dd April 10, 2026
.Dt LX 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lx
.Nd a modern file lister
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar options
.Op Ar files ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a modern replacement for
.Xr ls 1 .
It uses colours for information by default, helping you distinguish
between many types of files.
It has extra features not present in the original
.Xr ls 1 ,
such as viewing VCS status for a directory, recursing into directories
with a tree view, and compounding detail levels with
.Fl l ,
.Fl ll ,
and
.Fl lll .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Ss Display options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl 1 , Fl -oneline
Display one entry per line.
.It Fl l , Fl -long
Display extended file metadata as a table.
Repeat for more detail:
.Fl l
(basic),
.Fl ll
(+ group, VCS),
.Fl lll
(+ header, all timestamps, links, blocks).
.It Fl G , Fl -grid
Display entries as a grid (default).
.It Fl x , Fl -across
Sort the grid across, rather than downwards.
.It Fl R , Fl -recurse
Recurse into directories.
.It Fl T , Fl -tree
Recurse into directories as a tree.
.It Fl L , Fl -level Ns = Ns Ar DEPTH
Limit the depth of recursion.
.It Fl -classify Ns Op = Ns Ar WHEN
Display file kind indicators next to file names.
.Ar WHEN
is
.Cm always ,
.Cm auto ,
or
.Cm never .
.It Fl C , Fl -count
Print a summary to stderr showing the number of items displayed.
When combined with
.Fl Z Ns / Ns Fl -total ,
also shows the total size of displayed items.
In tree views, expanded directories are not counted towards the total
(their children account for themselves); pruned or depth-limited
directories use their recursive total.
The size respects
.Fl b
(bytes) and
.Fl B
(binary) formatting.
Works with all view modes including tree and recursive listings.
.It Fl -colour Ns = Ns Ar WHEN
When to use terminal colours.
.Ar WHEN
is
.Cm always ,
.Cm auto ,
or
.Cm never .
Alias:
.Fl -color .
.It Fl -gradient Ns Op = Ns Ar COLUMNS
Per-column gradient on/off.
.Ar COLUMNS
is a comma-separated list of column names that should render with
their gradient.
The recognised columns are
.Cm size
plus the four timestamp columns
.Cm modified ,
.Cm accessed ,
.Cm changed ,
and
.Cm created ;
the bulk token
.Cm date
flips all four timestamp columns at once.
Special tokens
.Cm none
(no gradients) and
.Cm all
(every gradient-capable column, the default) only make sense alone.
Bare
.Fl -gradient
is equivalent to
.Fl -gradient Ns = Ns Cm all .
.Pp
Examples:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
lx -lt --gradient=modified         # gradient on modified, others flat
lx -lt --gradient=size,modified    # size and modified gradient
lx -lt --gradient=accessed,created # mix and match
lx -lt --gradient=date             # bulk: every timestamp column
.Ed
.Pp
The flat colour each column collapses to when its gradient is
disabled comes from the active theme:
.Sy size-major
/
.Sy size-minor
for the size column,
.Sy date-flat
for each timestamp column.
Each timestamp column also has its own per-column flat
.Pq Sy date-modified-flat , No etc\&. ,
see
.Xr lxconfig.toml 5
for the full set of theme keys.
.It Fl -no-gradient
Hidden alias for
.Fl -gradient Ns = Ns Cm none .
Turns off the size gradient and every timestamp column's gradient.
.It Fl -smooth
Smoothly interpolate gradients between the theme's per-tier anchor
colours.
Instead of the six discrete date tiers (or five size tiers) snapping
at each boundary, each file gets its own colour proportional to its
position on a log scale between adjacent anchors.
The interpolation happens in perceptually uniform Oklab space so
transitions don't pass through muddy midpoints.
.Pp
Only takes effect on 24-bit themes whose anchor colours are all
.Sy Color::Rgb
\(em the builtin
.Sy lx-24bit
theme, the curated
.Sy solarized-\&* ,
.Sy catppuccin-\&* ,
.Sy gruvbox-\&* ,
.Sy nord-\&*
themes, and any user theme that uses hex or
.Sy rgb\&:
values throughout.
On 256-colour or basic ANSI themes
.Fl -smooth
is silently a no-op.
Columns whose gradient is off
.Pq e.g. Fl -gradient Ns = Ns Cm size , Fl -no-gradient
are also unaffected.
.Pp
Default: off.
Opt in per-invocation with
.Fl -smooth ,
per-process with
.Ev LX_PERSONALITY ,
or permanently with
.Sy smooth = true
in your personality config.
.Pp
The formulas come from Bj\(:orn Ottosson,
.Dq A perceptual color space for image processing
(2020),
.Lk https://bottosson.github.io/posts/oklab/ .
.It Fl -no-smooth
Hidden suppressor for
.Fl -smooth .
Useful for turning off a personality setting from the command line.
.Pp
Timestamps are also coloured by age: recent files appear brighter,
older files fade towards grey.
The six tiers
.Pq Sy date-now No through Sy date-old
are theme keys, and each timestamp column can override them
individually
.Pq Sy date-modified-now , No etc\&. ;
see
.Xr lxconfig.toml 5 .
.It Fl -icons Ns Op = Ns Ar WHEN
Display icons next to file names.
.Ar WHEN
is
.Cm always ,
.Cm auto ,
or
.Cm never .
.It Fl -no-icons
Don't display icons.
Alias for
.Fl -icons Ns = Ns Cm never .
.It Fl w , Fl -width Ns = Ns Ar COLS
Set the terminal width explicitly, overriding auto-detection and the
.Ev COLUMNS
environment variable.
.It Fl A , Fl -absolute
Display fully resolved absolute file paths.
.It Fl -hyperlink Ns Op = Ns Ar WHEN
Display file names as clickable OSC 8 hyperlinks.
.Ar WHEN
is
.Cm always ,
.Cm auto ,
or
.Cm never .
.It Fl -quotes Ns Op = Ns Ar WHEN
Quote file names containing spaces.
.Ar WHEN
is
.Cm always ,
.Cm auto ,
or
.Cm never .
.It Fl -theme Ns = Ns Ar NAME
Select a named theme from the config file.
.El
.Ss Filtering options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl a , Fl -all
Show hidden and dot files.
Use twice
.Pq Fl aa
to also show
.Pa \&.
and
.Pa .. .
.It Fl d , Fl -list-dirs
List directories as regular files.
.It Fl D , Fl -only-dirs
List only directories, not files.
.It Fl f , Fl -only-files
List only regular files, not directories.
.It Fl I , Fl -ignore Ns = Ns Ar GLOBS
Glob patterns, pipe-separated, of files to hide completely.
Also accepted:
.Fl -ignore-glob
.Pq exa/eza compatibility .
.It Fl P , Fl -prune Ns = Ns Ar GLOBS
Glob patterns, pipe-separated, of directories to show but not recurse
into.
The directory itself is displayed (with metadata and
.Fl -total
if active), but its children are hidden.
Only meaningful with
.Fl T
or
.Fl R ;
silently ignored otherwise.
Also accepted:
.Fl -prune-glob
.Pq exa/eza compatibility .
.It Fl -symlinks Ns = Ns Ar MODE
How to handle symbolic links.
.Ar MODE
is
.Cm show
(default),
.Cm hide ,
or
.Cm follow .
.Cm show
displays symlinks as-is.
.Cm hide
removes symlinks from listings.
.Cm follow
dereferences symlinks, showing the target's metadata, and recurses
into symlinked directories in
.Fl T Ns / Ns Fl R
mode.
Broken symlinks are always shown regardless of mode.
.El
.Pp
See also
.Fl -vcs-ignore
under
.Sx VCS INTEGRATION
for hiding files matched by repository ignore rules.
.Ss Sorting options
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl r , Fl -reverse
Reverse the sort order.
.It Fl s , Fl -sort Ns = Ns Ar FIELD
Which field to sort by.
.El
.Pp
Valid sort fields, by category:
.Bl -tag -width "Ownership and mode" -offset indent
.It Sy Name / extension
.Cm name ,
.Cm Name ,
.Cm extension ,
.Cm Extension ,
.Cm version
.It Sy Size and allocation
.Cm size ,
.Cm blocks ,
.Cm links
.It Sy Ownership and mode
.Cm permissions ,
.Cm flags ,
.Cm user ,
.Cm User ,
.Cm group ,
.Cm Group ,
.Cm uid ,
.Cm gid
.It Sy Time
.Cm modified ,
.Cm changed ,
.Cm accessed ,
.Cm created
.It Sy VCS
.Cm vcs
.It Sy Miscellaneous
.Cm inode ,
.Cm type ,
.Cm none
.El
.Pp
As a general rule, any column-add long flag is also accepted as a
sort field name.
.Fl -permissions
the column flag has
.Cm permissions
the sort field,
.Fl -size
has
.Cm size ,
and so on.
Short aliases are also accepted where the column flag has them.
.Pp
The
.Cm modified
sort field has the aliases
.Cm date ,
.Cm time ,
.Cm mod ,
and
.Cm newest .
Its reverse order has the aliases
.Cm age
and
.Cm oldest .
Other aliases:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
.Cm ext
/
.Cm Ext
for
.Cm extension
/
.Cm Extension
.It
.Cm filesize
for
.Cm size
.It
.Cm mode ,
.Cm octal
for
.Cm permissions
.It
.Cm ch
for
.Cm changed
.It
.Cm acc
for
.Cm accessed
.It
.Cm cr
for
.Cm created
.El
.Pp
Sort fields starting with a capital letter sort uppercase before
lowercase: A then B then a then b.
Fields starting with a lowercase letter mix them: A then a then B
then b.
This applies to
.Cm name Ns / Ns Cm Name ,
.Cm extension Ns / Ns Cm Extension ,
.Cm user Ns / Ns Cm User ,
and
.Cm group Ns / Ns Cm Group .
.Pp
.Sy -s version
is an alias for
.Sy -s name
and exists for users migrating from tools that use a separate flag.
.Nm Ns 's
default name sort already handles embedded numbers naturally
.Pq Sy v1.10 No sorts after Sy v1.2
via
.Em natord .
.Pp
.Sy -s permissions
sorts by the numeric octal value of the permission bits, independent
of whether the display is symbolic or octal.
.Sy -s flags
sorts on the raw bit pattern of platform file flags (macOS/BSD
.Xr chflags 1 ,
Linux
.Xr chattr 1 ) .
.Pp
.Sy -s user
and
.Sy -s group
sort by resolved owner/group name, falling back to UID/GID for
unresolvable entries.
.Sy -s uid
and
.Sy -s gid
sort by the raw numeric ID regardless of whether a name is available.
.Pp
.Sy -s vcs
sorts by VCS status with attention-worthy states (conflicted,
modified, added, etc.) first and unmodified files last.
In grid and lines views (where no VCS cache is available) it falls
back to name order.
Secondary sort within a status group is by name.
.Pp
With
.Fl Z Ns / Ns Fl -total ,
sorting by
.Cm size
uses the recursive directory total instead of the inode size.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -group-dirs Ns = Ns Ar WHEN
Group directories before or after other files.
.Ar WHEN
is
.Cm first ,
.Cm last ,
or
.Cm none .
Directory grouping partitions the listing into two blocks
(directories and non-directories); the primary sort field then orders
entries within each block independently.
.It Fl F , Fl -dirs-first
Directories first (short for
.Fl -group-dirs Ns = Ns Cm first ) .
Legacy alias:
.Fl -group-directories-first .
.It Fl J , Fl -dirs-last
Directories last (short for
.Fl -group-dirs Ns = Ns Cm last ) .
Legacy alias:
.Fl -group-directories-last .
.It Fl -no-dirs-first , Fl -no-dirs-last
Hidden suppressors for
.Fl F
/
.Fl J .
Either one forces
.Fl -group-dirs Ns = Ns Cm none ,
useful for turning off a personality's default grouping from the
command line.
.El
.Ss Long view options
These options affect the columns displayed in long view
.Pq Fl l .
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -size-style Ns = Ns Ar STYLE
How to display file sizes.
.Ar STYLE
is
.Cm decimal
(default: k, M, G prefixes),
.Cm binary
(KiB, MiB, GiB), or
.Cm bytes
(raw count).
.It Fl B , Fl -binary
Alias for
.Fl -size-style Ns = Ns Cm binary .
.It Fl b , Fl -bytes
Alias for
.Fl -size-style Ns = Ns Cm bytes .
.It Fl K , Fl -decimal
Alias for
.Fl -size-style Ns = Ns Cm decimal .
Useful for overriding a personality that sets
.Cm binary
or
.Cm bytes
back to the default.
.It Fl g , Fl -group
List each file's group name.
The group is coloured in three tiers: your primary group, a
supplementary group you belong to, or other.
.It Fl -uid
Show the numeric user ID column (long-form only).
Composes with
.Fl u Ns / Ns Fl -user :
.Sy lx -lug --uid --gid
shows both names and IDs side-by-side.
.It Fl -gid
Show the numeric group ID column (long-form only).
.It Fl h , Fl -header
Add a header row to each column.
.It Fl H , Fl -links
List each file's number of hard links.
.It Fl i , Fl -inode
List each file's inode number.
.It Fl m , Fl -modified
Add the modified timestamp column to the long listing.
.It Fl c , Fl -changed
Add the changed timestamp column to the long listing.
.It Fl -accessed
Add the accessed timestamp column to the long listing.
.It Fl -created
Add the created timestamp column to the long listing.
.It Fl t
Compounding timestamp shortcut.
.Fl t
adds
.Cm modified ,
.Fl tt
adds
.Cm modified
and
.Cm changed ,
.Fl ttt
adds all four timestamps
.Pq Cm modified , changed , created , accessed .
Composes with
.Fl l ,
.Fl -format ,
and
.Fl -columns .
Unlike the individual flags,
.Fl t
has no long form \(em its only sensible spelling is the compounding
short.
.It Fl -time-style Ns = Ns Ar STYLE
How to format timestamps.
Built-in styles:
.Cm default ,
.Cm iso ,
.Cm long-iso ,
.Cm full-iso ,
.Cm relative .
A custom
.Xr strftime 3
format can be specified with a leading
.Sq +
.Pq e.g. Sy --time-style='+%d %b %Y' .
The
.Cm relative
style shows human-friendly durations such as
.Dq 2 hours ago
or
.Dq 3 days ago .
.It Fl S , Fl -blocks
List each file's number of file system blocks.
.It Fl Z , Fl -total
Show total recursive size for directories.
.Fl -total-size
is also accepted as a long-form alias.
When combined with
.Fl -sort Ns = Ns Cm size ,
sorting uses the recursive total.
.It Fl @ , Fl -extended
List each file's extended attributes and sizes.
.It Fl o , Fl -octal
List each file's permissions in octal format.
Also accepted:
.Fl -octal-permissions
.Pq exa/eza compatibility .
.It Fl O , Fl -flags
Show platform file flags.
On macOS and
.Fx ,
these are the flags set by
.Xr chflags 1
and shown by
.Sy ls -lO
(macOS) or
.Sy ls -lo
.Pq Fx
(e.g.
.Cm hidden ,
.Cm uchg ,
.Cm uappnd ,
.Cm nodump ,
.Cm uarch ) .
On Linux, these are the file attributes set by
.Xr chattr 1
and shown by
.Xr lsattr 1
(e.g.
.Cm immutable ,
.Cm append ,
.Cm nodump ,
.Cm noatime ) .
Shows
.Sq -
when no flags are set.
Available via
.Fl -columns Ns = Ns Cm flags .
.El
.Ss Column and format selection
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -columns Ns = Ns Ar COLS
Comma-separated list of columns to display.
Overrides the
.Fl l
tier.
Implies long view.
Valid names:
.Cm permissions ,
.Cm size ,
.Cm user ,
.Cm uid ,
.Cm group ,
.Cm gid ,
.Cm links ,
.Cm inode ,
.Cm blocks ,
.Cm octal ,
.Cm flags ,
.Cm modified ,
.Cm changed ,
.Cm accessed ,
.Cm created ,
.Cm vcs .
.Cm perms
and
.Cm mode
are accepted as aliases for
.Cm permissions .
.It Fl -format Ns = Ns Ar NAME
Select a named column format.
Compiled-in formats:
.Cm long ,
.Cm long2 ,
.Cm long3 .
Additional formats may be defined in the config file.
Implies long view.
.El
.Pp
Precedence:
.Fl -columns
>
.Fl -format
>
.Fl l
tier > individual flags.
.Ss Column overrides
Every column and display option has a negative form for overriding
personality defaults.
For flags with a short form, a
.Fl -no-X
alias is also accepted (e.g.
.Fl -no-h
for
.Fl -no-header ,
.Fl -no-Z
for
.Fl -no-total ,
.Fl -no-C
for
.Fl -no-count ,
.Fl -no-g
for
.Fl -no-group ,
.Fl -no-i
for
.Fl -no-inode ,
.Fl -no-H
for
.Fl -no-links ,
.Fl -no-S
for
.Fl -no-blocks ,
.Fl -no-o
for
.Fl -no-octal ,
.Fl -no-u
for
.Fl -no-user ,
.Fl -no-z
for
.Fl -no-size ,
.Fl -no-M
for
.Fl -no-permissions ,
.Fl -no-m
for
.Fl -no-modified ,
.Fl -no-c
for
.Fl -no-changed ) .
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl M , Fl -permissions , Fl -no-permissions
Show or suppress the permissions field.
.Fl -mode
/
.Fl -no-mode
are accepted as long aliases (matching traditional Unix terminology).
.Fl -no-M
is a hidden short-letter alias for
.Fl -no-permissions .
.It Fl z , Fl -size , Fl -no-size
Show or suppress the file size field.
.Fl -filesize
/
.Fl -no-filesize
are accepted as hidden aliases.
.Fl -no-z
is a hidden short-letter alias for
.Fl -no-size .
.It Fl u , Fl -user , Fl -no-user
Show or suppress the user field.
.Fl -no-u
is a hidden short-letter alias for
.Fl -no-user .
.It Fl -uid , Fl -no-uid
Show or suppress the numeric user ID column (long-form only).
.It Fl -gid , Fl -no-gid
Show or suppress the numeric group ID column (long-form only).
.It Fl -no-time
Clear all timestamp columns from the base format.
Runs
.Em before
individual timestamp adds, so
.Sy --no-time --accessed
leaves just the accessed column.
Accepts
.Fl -no-timestamps
as a hidden alias.
.It Fl -no-modified , Fl -no-changed , Fl -no-accessed , Fl -no-created
Suppress individual timestamp columns.
.Fl -no-m
and
.Fl -no-c
are accepted as hidden short-letter aliases for
.Fl -no-modified
and
.Fl -no-changed
respectively.
Unlike
.Fl -no-time ,
these run
.Em after
individual adds, so they beat an explicit
.Fl -modified
on the same command line.
.It Fl -no-inode
Suppress the inode field.
.It Fl -no-group
Suppress the group field.
.It Fl -no-links
Suppress the hard links field.
.It Fl -no-blocks
Suppress the blocks field.
.It Fl -no-octal
Suppress the octal permissions column.
.It Fl -no-header
Suppress the header row.
.It Fl -no-count
Suppress the
.Fl C Ns / Ns Fl -count
summary.
.It Fl -no-total
Suppress
.Fl Z Ns / Ns Fl -total .
.El
.Sh PERSONALITIES
Personalities are
.Nm Ns 's
answer to
.Sy alias ll='ls -l' :
a structured, inheritable, introspectable way to have multiple
.Dq modes
for listing files, without shell configuration.
A personality is a named bundle of flags and settings, activated
either by the name
.Nm
is invoked under (via an
.Sy argv[0]
symlink), by the
.Fl p Ns / Ns Fl -personality
flag, by the
.Ev LX_PERSONALITY
environment variable, or by the compiled-in default when bare
.Nm
is run.
.Pp
Resolution precedence (highest to lowest):
.Fl p
flag,
.Sy argv[0]
symlink name,
.Ev LX_PERSONALITY ,
compiled-in default
.Pq Cm lx .
When
.Nm
is invoked by its own name, the
.Sy argv[0]
step is skipped so that
.Ev LX_PERSONALITY
can take effect.
An unknown name from
.Fl p
or
.Ev LX_PERSONALITY
is an error; an unknown
.Sy argv[0]
name falls through silently.
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl p , Fl -personality Ns = Ns Ar NAME
Apply a named personality for this invocation.
Equivalent to invoking
.Nm
via an
.Sy argv[0]
symlink with the same name.
.El
.Pp
Compiled-in personalities:
.Bl -tag -width "Cm tree" -offset indent -compact
.It Cm lx
the default, used when
.Nm
is invoked as itself.
.It Cm ll
long view equivalent to
.Sy lx -l ,
with VCS status and directories grouped first.
.It Cm la
like
.Cm ll ,
plus hidden files.
.It Cm lll
tier-3 long view with header, all timestamps, and extra metadata
columns.
.It Cm tree
recursive tree view with directories first.
.It Cm ls
tries to mimic POSIX
.Xr ls 1 .
.El
.Pp
Additional personalities may be defined in the config file.
Every CLI flag has a corresponding config key, so a personality
definition is simply the flags you would type on the command line,
spelled out as TOML.
Personalities support inheritance
.Pq Sy inherits = \(dqNAME\(dq
to build on another personality's settings, and may select a theme
.Pq Sy theme = \(dqNAME\(dq :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[personality.work]
inherits = "ll"
ignore = "*.tmp|*.bak"
time-style = "long-iso"
theme = "catppuccin-mocha"
.Ed
.Pp
When
.Nm
is invoked via a symlink whose name matches a personality, that
personality is applied automatically.
For example, if
.Sy ll
is a symlink to
.Nm
on your
.Ev PATH ,
running
.Sy ll
is equivalent to
.Sy lx -p ll .
This is the recommended way to use personalities in daily work \(em
create the symlinks once, and never type
.Fl p
again.
.Pp
For the full syntax, including every personality setting key, the
inheritance semantics, and the conditional
.Sy [[when]]
block vocabulary for environment-based overrides, see the
.Sx PERSONALITIES
section of
.Xr lxconfig.toml 5 .
.Sh VCS INTEGRATION
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -vcs Ns = Ns Ar BACKEND
Select the VCS backend.
.Ar BACKEND
is
.Cm auto ,
.Cm git ,
.Cm jj ,
or
.Cm none .
Default:
.Cm auto
(prefers jj if
.Pa .jj/
exists, falls back to git).
The
.Cm jj
backend requires
.Nm
to be built with the
.Sy jj
feature flag.
.It Fl -vcs-status
Show per-file VCS status column.
The column header shows the active backend:
.Sy Git
or
.Sy JJ .
Status characters:
.Sq -
not modified,
.Sq M
modified,
.Sq A
added (jj) /
.Sq N
new (git),
.Sq D
deleted,
.Sq R
renamed,
.Sq C
copied,
.Sq I
ignored,
.Sq U
untracked,
.Sq \&!
conflicted.
git shows two columns (staged + unstaged); when both are the same,
they collapse into one character.
jj shows two columns: change status
.Pq Sq @ No vs Sq @-
and tracking status
.Pq U untracked, I ignored, space = tracked .
.It Fl -vcs-ignore
Hide files ignored by VCS and VCS metadata directories
.Pq Pa .git , Pa .jj .
Works with both git and jj backends.
.It Fl -vcs-repos
Show a per-directory VCS repository indicator column.
For each directory, shows
.Sq G
(git repo),
.Sq J
(jj repo), or
.Sq -
(not a repo).
Git repos also show the current branch name.
Useful for scanning workspace directories containing multiple
repositories.
.El
.Pp
Note: the legacy
.Fl -git
and
.Fl -git-ignore
flags have been removed.
Use
.Fl -vcs-status
and
.Fl -vcs-ignore
instead.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
.Nm
reads a TOML configuration file from these locations (first found
wins):
.Bl -enum -offset indent -compact
.It
.Ev LX_CONFIG
\(em explicit path
.It
.Pa ~/.lxconfig.toml
.It
.Pa $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lx/config.toml
.It
.Pa ~/Library/Application Support/lx/config.toml
(macOS)
.El
.Pp
Run
.Sy lx --init-config
to generate a commented starter file.
.Pp
The config file includes a
.Sy version
field to track the schema version.
The current version is
.Sy \(dq0.5\(dq .
If you have a legacy config from an earlier version, run
.Sy lx --upgrade-config
to migrate it (migrations from 0.1 through 0.4 are all supported; a
.Pa .bak
of the original is saved automatically).
.Pp
For the full config file format \(em every section type, every key,
the conditional
.Sy [[when]]
block syntax for environment-based personality overrides, and the
complete theme/style/class vocabulary \(em see
.Xr lxconfig.toml 5 .
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -show-config
Show a coloured summary of the active configuration and exit.
.It Fl -init-config
Generate a commented starter config file at
.Pa ~/.lxconfig.toml .
.It Fl -upgrade-config
Upgrade a legacy config file to the current format.
.It Fl -save-as Ns = Ns Ar NAME
Save the CLI flags from this invocation as a named personality in
.Pa conf.d/ Ns Ar NAME Ns Pa .toml .
The saved definition inherits from the active personality and
contains only the flags you typed on this command line.
If the target file already exists, the previous file is backed up
with a
.Pa .bak
suffix.
Exits after saving without listing files.
.El
.Pp
The
.Fl -dump-*
flags output copy-pasteable TOML definitions.
Each accepts an optional
.Sy = Ns Ar NAME
to dump a single definition, or dumps all when used bare:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -dump-class Ns Op = Ns Ar NAME
Dump file-type class definitions.
.It Fl -dump-format Ns Op = Ns Ar NAME
Dump column format definitions.
.It Fl -dump-personality Ns Op = Ns Ar NAME
Dump personality definitions (before inheritance merging).
.It Fl -dump-theme Ns Op = Ns Ar NAME
Dump theme definitions.
.It Fl -dump-style Ns Op = Ns Ar NAME
Dump style definitions.
.El
.Sh DROP-IN DIRECTORY
After loading the main config file,
.Nm
scans a
.Pa conf.d/
directory for additional TOML fragments.
Each
.Pa *.toml
file in the directory is loaded in alphabetical order and merged
into the configuration.
Later files override earlier ones by name.
.Pp
The drop-in directory is searched at:
.Bl -enum -offset indent -compact
.It
The parent directory of the main config file, plus
.Pa conf.d/
.It
.Pa $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lx/conf.d/
(default:
.Pa ~/.config/lx/conf.d/ )
.It
.Pa ~/Library/Application Support/lx/conf.d/
(macOS)
.El
.Pp
Drop-in files do not need a
.Sy version
field.
They may contain any combination of
.Sy [theme.*] ,
.Sy [style.*] ,
.Sy [class] ,
.Sy [personality.*] ,
and
.Sy [format.*]
sections.
.Pp
.Nm
ships with a library of curated themes in the
.Pa themes/
directory of the source tree \(em copy any of them to
.Pa conf.d/
to activate.
.Sh SHELL COMPLETIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -completions Ns = Ns Ar SHELL
Generate shell completion script for
.Ar SHELL
and write it to stdout.
.Ar SHELL
is one of
.Cm bash ,
.Cm zsh ,
.Cm fish ,
.Cm elvish ,
or
.Cm powershell .
.El
.Pp
Quick activation for the current session:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# bash
source <(lx --completions bash)

# zsh
source <(lx --completions zsh)

# fish
lx --completions fish | source
.Ed
.Pp
Or save to the standard location for permanent installation, e.g.:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
lx --completions bash > ~/.local/share/bash-completion/completions/lx
lx --completions zsh  > ~/.zfunc/_lx
lx --completions fish > ~/.config/fish/completions/lx.fish
.Ed
.Pp
(For zsh,
.Pa ~/.zfunc
must be in your
.Ev fpath . )
.Pp
For
.Cm bash ,
.Cm zsh ,
and
.Cm fish ,
the generated script also registers completions for every
personality symlink found in
.Ev PATH
that points to the
.Nm
binary.
For example, if
.Pa ll
and
.Pa tree
are symlinks to
.Nm ,
tab completion works for those names too.
Regenerate completions after creating or removing personality
symlinks.
.Pp
.Cm elvish
and
.Cm powershell
completions cover the
.Nm
command only.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev LX_CONFIG
Explicit path to the config file.
.It Ev LX_DEBUG
Enable debug logging.
Set to
.Sy 1
for debug,
.Sy trace
for trace level.
.It Ev LX_GRID_ROWS
Minimum rows before the grid-details view activates.
Also settable as
.Sy grid-rows
in a personality definition (config takes precedence).
.It Ev LX_ICON_SPACING
Number of spaces between an icon and its filename.
Also settable as
.Sy icon-spacing
in a personality definition (config takes precedence).
.It Ev LX_PERSONALITY
Session-level personality selection.
Equivalent to
.Sy -p Ar NAME
but lower in precedence than both
.Fl p
and
.Sy argv[0]
symlink dispatch.
Useful for setting a default personality per terminal or shell
session.
.It Ev LS_COLORS
Standard file-type colour scheme.
.It Ev COLUMNS
Override terminal width.
.It Ev TIME_STYLE
Default timestamp style (overridden by
.Fl -time-style ) .
.It Ev NO_COLOR
Disable colours.
See
.Lk https://no-color.org/ .
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width "0" -compact
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
Runtime error (I/O error during operation).
.It 3
Options error (invalid command-line arguments).
.El
.Sh FEATURES
.Nm
has optional feature flags that control which VCS backends are
compiled in.
These are selected at build time with
.Sy cargo build --features .
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy git Pq default
Git support via the
.Sy git2
crate.
.It Sy jj Pq opt-in
Jujutsu support via the
.Sy jj-lib
crate.
Adds approximately 5 MB to the binary size.
Build with:
.Sy cargo build --features jj .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lxconfig.toml 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
is maintained by
.An Johann Visagie ,
based on exa by
.An Benjamin Sago .
Source code:
.Lk https://github.com/wjv/lx
