.Dd April 10, 2026
.Dt LXCONFIG.TOML 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lxconfig.toml
.Nd configuration file for
.Xr lx 1
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm lx
searches for a TOML configuration file in these locations (first
found wins):
.Bl -enum -offset indent -compact
.It
.Ev LX_CONFIG
\(em explicit path override
.It
.Pa ~/.lxconfig.toml
\(em simple home directory location
.It
.Pa $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lx/config.toml
(default
.Pa ~/.config/lx/config.toml )
.It
.Pa ~/Library/Application Support/lx/config.toml
(macOS only)
.El
.Pp
Run
.Sy lx --init-config
to generate a commented starter file at
.Pa ~/.lxconfig.toml .
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm lx
configuration file is written in TOML.
It has the following top-level sections:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy version
Config schema version (required).
.It Sy [format]
Named column layouts for long view (flat section; each key is a
format name).
.It Sy [personality.NAME]
Named bundles of format, columns, and settings.
.It Sy [theme.NAME]
Named colour themes for UI elements.
.It Sy [class]
File-type class definitions \(em named lists of glob patterns.
.It Sy [style.NAME]
Named sets of file colour rules.
Can reference classes by name and/or match files directly by glob
pattern or exact filename.
.El
.Sh VERSIONING
Every configuration file must declare a schema version at the top:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
version = "0.5"
.Ed
.Pp
This is the
.Em config schema version ,
not the
.Nm lx
release version.
It only increments when the config format changes in a way that
requires migration.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "Config version" -offset indent -compact
.It Sy "(none)"
lx 0.1.x \(em original format with
.Sy [defaults]
.It Sy "0.2"
lx 0.2.0+ \(em personalities replace
.Sy [defaults]
.It Sy "0.3"
lx 0.3.0+ \(em classes, flat formats, exa style chain
.It Sy "0.4"
lx 0.7.0+ \(em conditional overrides
.Pq Sy [[when]] No blocks
.It Sy "0.5"
lx 0.8.0+ \(em
.Sy time
and
.Sy numeric
settings removed; timestamps and UID/GID now ordinary columns
.It Sy "0.6"
lx 0.9.0+ \(em
.Sy [[when]]
env conditions accept TOML arrays and glob patterns
.El
.Pp
Versions
.Sy "0.3" ,
.Sy "0.4" ,
and
.Sy "0.5"
are still accepted by
.Nm lx
0.9+ (0.6 is a strict superset), with caveats:
.Sy [[when]]
blocks in a
.Sy "0.3"
config trigger a warning, and the
.Sy time = \(dq...\(dq
and
.Sy numeric = ...
settings (valid in 0.3/0.4) trigger deprecation warnings at load time
and are ignored.
.Pp
If
.Nm lx
encounters a config file with an older version (or no version
field), it refuses to load it and prints a message directing the user
to run:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
lx --upgrade-config
.Ed
.Pp
This command migrates the config to the current format (0.1\(->0.5,
0.2\(->0.5, 0.3\(->0.5, and 0.4\(->0.5 are all supported) and saves
the original as
.Pa ~/.lxconfig.toml.bak .
The 0.3\(->0.5 and 0.4\(->0.5 migrations only bump the version string
(and warn if
.Sy time = \(dq...\(dq
or
.Sy numeric = ...
are present); earlier migrations also restructure the file.
.Sh FORMATS
A format defines a column layout for long view.
Formats are defined as keys in a flat
.Sy [format]
section.
Each key is a format name; its value is either a TOML array or a
comma-separated string of column names:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[format]
long  = ["permissions", "size", "user", "modified"]
long2 = ["permissions", "size", "user", "group", "modified", "vcs"]
long3 = ["permissions", "links", "size", "blocks", "user", "group",
         "modified", "changed", "created", "accessed", "vcs"]
compact = "permissions,size,modified"
.Ed
.Pp
Three compiled-in formats correspond to the
.Fl l
tier system:
.Bl -tag -width "Tier 3: -lll" -offset indent -compact
.It Sy Tier 1: -l
.Sy long
\(em permissions, size, user, modified
.It Sy Tier 2: -ll
.Sy long2
\(em permissions, size, user, group, modified, vcs
.It Sy Tier 3: -lll
.Sy long3
\(em permissions, links, size, blocks, user, group, modified,
changed, created, accessed, vcs
.El
.Pp
Defining a format with a compiled-in name in the config file
overrides the built-in.
Custom formats are used via
.Sy --format= Ns Ar NAME
or referenced from personality definitions.
.Ss Valid column names
.Bl -tag -width "permissions (alias perms, mode)"
.It Cm permissions Pq aliases Cm perms , mode
File permissions.
.It Cm size Pq alias Cm filesize
File size.
.It Cm user
Owning user.
.It Cm group
Owning group.
.It Cm links
Hard link count.
.It Cm inode
Inode number.
.It Cm blocks
File system block count.
.It Cm octal
Octal permissions.
.It Cm modified
Last modification timestamp.
.It Cm changed
Last status change timestamp.
.It Cm accessed
Last access timestamp.
.It Cm created
Creation timestamp.
.It Cm vcs
VCS status column.
.El
.Sh PERSONALITIES
A personality bundles a format, columns, and settings under a name.
Invoke a personality with
.Sy --personality= Ns Ar NAME ,
.Sy -p Ar NAME ,
or via an
.Sy argv[0]
symlink.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[personality.ll]
inherits = "lx"
format = "long2"
group-dirs = "first"
.Ed
.Ss Structural fields
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy inherits
Name of a parent personality (see
.Sx Inheritance
below).
.It Sy format
Reference to a named format (looked up in
.Sy [format] ) .
.It Sy columns
Inline column list; overrides
.Sy format
if both are given.
Accepts a TOML array or comma-separated string.
.El
.Pp
All other keys in a personality section are
.Em settings
\(em each corresponds to a CLI flag.
Boolean flags take
.Sy true Ns / Ns Sy false ;
value flags take a string or integer.
.Ss Setting keys
.Sy Display options\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy oneline Pq bool ,
.Sy long Pq bool ,
.Sy grid Pq bool ,
.Sy across Pq bool ,
.Sy recurse Pq bool ,
.Sy tree Pq bool ,
.Sy classify Pq string: Cm always Ns / Ns Cm auto Ns / Ns Cm never ,
.Sy colour Pq string: Cm always Ns / Ns Cm auto Ns / Ns Cm never ,
.Sy gradient Pq string: comma-separated size/date/modified/accessed/changed/created, or all/none ,
.Sy smooth Pq bool: interpolate gradients between anchors on 24-bit themes ,
.Sy icons Pq string: Cm always Ns / Ns Cm auto Ns / Ns Cm never ,
.Sy width Pq integer ,
.Sy absolute Pq bool ,
.Sy hyperlink Pq string: Cm always Ns / Ns Cm auto Ns / Ns Cm never ,
.Sy quotes Pq string: Cm always Ns / Ns Cm auto Ns / Ns Cm never ,
.Sy theme Pq string: named theme ,
.Sy count Pq bool .
.El
.Pp
.Sy Filtering and sorting\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy all Pq bool ,
.Sy list-dirs Pq bool ,
.Sy level Pq integer ,
.Sy reverse Pq bool ,
.Sy sort Pq string ,
.Sy group-dirs Pq string: Cm first Ns / Ns Cm last Ns / Ns Cm none ,
.Sy only-dirs Pq bool ,
.Sy only-files Pq bool ,
.Sy ignore Pq string: pipe-separated globs ,
.Sy prune Pq string: pipe-separated globs ,
.Sy symlinks Pq string: Cm show Ns / Ns Cm hide Ns / Ns Cm follow .
.El
.Pp
.Sy Long view options\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy size-style Pq string: Cm decimal Ns / Ns Cm binary Ns / Ns Cm bytes ,
.Sy binary Pq bool ,
.Sy bytes Pq bool ,
.Sy header Pq bool ,
.Sy inode Pq bool ,
.Sy links Pq bool ,
.Sy blocks Pq bool ,
.Sy group Pq bool ,
.Sy uid Pq bool ,
.Sy gid Pq bool ,
.Sy time-style Pq string: Cm default Ns / Ns Cm iso Ns / Ns Cm long-iso Ns / Ns Cm full-iso Ns / Ns Cm relative Ns / Ns Cm +FORMAT ,
.Sy modified Pq bool ,
.Sy changed Pq bool ,
.Sy accessed Pq bool ,
.Sy created Pq bool ,
.Sy total Pq bool ,
.Sy extended Pq bool ,
.Sy octal Pq bool ,
.Sy flags Pq bool ,
.Sy permissions Pq bool ,
.Sy size Pq bool ,
.Sy user Pq bool .
.El
.Pp
.Cm filesize ,
.Cm total-size ,
and
.Cm octal-permissions
are accepted as backward-compatible aliases for
.Sy size ,
.Sy total ,
and
.Sy octal
respectively.
.Pp
.Sy Layout tuning\&:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent
.It Sy grid-rows Pq integer
Minimum rows before the grid-details view activates.
Equivalent to the
.Ev LX_GRID_ROWS
environment variable; the config key takes precedence.
.It Sy icon-spacing Pq integer
Number of spaces between an icon and its filename.
Equivalent to
.Ev LX_ICON_SPACING ;
the config key takes precedence.
.El
.Pp
.Sy Numeric formatting\&:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent
.It Sy decimal-point Pq string
Override the locale's decimal separator.
Exactly one character.
.It Sy thousands-separator Pq string
Override the locale's thousands separator.
Zero or one character; empty string disables grouping.
.El
.Pp
Both apply to
.Em counts
(file sizes in all
.Sy size-style
modes,
.Sy --total
totals,
.Sy -CZ
summaries, block counts, link counts) but not to
.Em IDs
(inodes, UID, GID).
Always 3-digit grouping.
Setting these in
.Sy [personality.default]
makes them global.
.Pp
Removed in 0.5:
.Sy time
(string naming a single timestamp field) and
.Sy numeric
(boolean).
The
.Sy time
setting is replaced by the individual
.Sy modified Ns / Ns Sy changed Ns / Ns Sy accessed Ns / Ns Sy created
booleans (which are additive in 0.8+); set
.Sy no-time = true
to start from an empty timestamp set.
The
.Sy numeric
setting is replaced by the new first-class
.Sy uid
and
.Sy gid
columns.
For the old
.Sy "ls -n" Ns Ns No -style
numeric-only view, use
.Sy uid = true , gid = true , no-user = true , no-group = true
\(em or better, use
.Sy --columns
to pick exactly the columns you want.
.Pp
.Sy VCS\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy vcs Pq string: Cm auto Ns / Ns Cm git Ns / Ns Cm jj Ns / Ns Cm none ,
.Sy vcs-status Pq bool ,
.Sy vcs-ignore Pq bool ,
.Sy vcs-repos Pq bool .
.El
.Pp
.Sy Negation (override personality defaults)\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy no-permissions Pq bool ,
.Sy no-size Pq bool ,
.Sy no-user Pq bool ,
.Sy no-uid Pq bool ,
.Sy no-gid Pq bool ,
.Sy no-time Pq bool ,
.Sy no-modified Pq bool ,
.Sy no-changed Pq bool ,
.Sy no-accessed Pq bool ,
.Sy no-created Pq bool ,
.Sy no-icons Pq bool ,
.Sy no-inode Pq bool ,
.Sy no-group Pq bool ,
.Sy no-links Pq bool ,
.Sy no-blocks Pq bool ,
.Sy no-octal Pq bool ,
.Sy no-header Pq bool ,
.Sy no-count Pq bool ,
.Sy no-total Pq bool .
.El
.Pp
.Cm no-filesize
and
.Cm no-total-size
are accepted as backward-compatible aliases for
.Sy no-size
and
.Sy no-total
respectively.
.Pp
.Sy no-time
clears all timestamp columns from the base format as a bulk
shortcut; it runs before individual adds, so combining it with e.g.
.Sy accessed = true
leaves just the accessed column.
.Sy no-modified Ns / Ns Sy no-changed Ns / Ns Sy no-accessed Ns / Ns Sy no-created
suppress individual timestamp columns after adds have been applied.
.Pp
.Sy Column visibility (positive)\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy permissions Pq bool ,
.Sy size Pq bool ,
.Sy user Pq bool .
.El
.Ss Inheritance
Personalities support single inheritance via
.Sy inherits = \(dqNAME\(dq .
The child's
.Sy format
and
.Sy columns
replace the parent's entirely.
Settings are merged key-by-key, with the child's values winning on
conflict.
.Pp
Inheritance chains of arbitrary depth are supported.
Cycle detection prevents infinite loops.
.Pp
A common pattern is to define a shared base personality:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
default ---+---> lx ---+---> ll ---+---> lt
           |           |           \e---> la
           |           \e---> lll
           \e---> tree

ls  (standalone -- no inherits)
.Ed
.Pp
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[personality.default]
colour = "auto"
time-style = "default"
group-dirs = "none"
icons = "never"

[personality.lx]
inherits = "default"

[personality.ll]
inherits = "lx"
format = "long2"
group-dirs = "first"

[personality.lt]
inherits = "ll"
sort = "age"

[personality.ls]
grid = true
across = true
.Ed
.Pp
In this example,
.Cm lt
inherits
.Sy group-dirs = \(dqfirst\(dq
and
.Sy format = \(dqlong2\(dq
from
.Cm ll ,
which in turn inherits
.Sy colour = \(dqauto\(dq
and the other defaults from
.Cm lx
and
.Cm default .
The
.Cm ls
personality stands alone \(em it has no
.Sy inherits
and receives no inherited settings.
.Pp
Compiled-in personalities
.Pq Cm ll , la , lll , tree , ls
are used as fallbacks when a name is not defined in the config file.
.Ss Conditional overrides
A personality's settings can vary based on environment variables
using
.Sy [[personality.NAME.when]]
blocks.
Each block specifies conditions and settings to overlay when all
conditions match.
.Pp
Conditions use
.Sy env.VAR = value
where the TOML value type determines the check:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy env.VAR = \(dqstring\(dq
Exact string match against the variable's value.
If the string contains any of
.Sq * ,
.Sq \&? ,
or
.Sq \&[ ,
it is matched as a glob pattern instead (added in 0.6).
.It Sy env.VAR = [\(dqstring\(dq, \(dqstring\(dq]
TOML array \(em matches if any element matches.
Each element is independently matched as a literal or a glob.
Added in 0.6.
.It Sy env.VAR = true
Variable must be set (to any value, including empty).
.It Sy env.VAR = false
Variable must be truly unset (not just empty).
.El
.Pp
All conditions within a single block must match (AND logic).
.Pp
.Sy Examples\&:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# Icons only in terminals with Nerd Font support.
[personality.lx]
icons = "never"

[[personality.lx.when]]
env.TERM_PROGRAM = "ghostty"
icons = "always"

# Disable colour over SSH.
[[personality.lx.when]]
env.SSH_CONNECTION = true
colour = "never"

# Auto-select theme tier based on terminal capability.
# Glob match against TERM, array of accepted COLORTERM values.
[personality.default]
theme = "exa"

[[personality.default.when]]
env.TERM = "*-256color"
theme = "lx-256"

[[personality.default.when]]
env.COLORTERM = ["truecolor", "24bit"]
theme = "lx-24bit"
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Evaluation rules\&:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
All conditions in a block must match (AND logic).
.It
Multiple
.Sy when
blocks are tried in order; all matching blocks apply, with later
blocks overriding earlier ones.
.It
The base personality (without
.Sy when )
is the default when no block matches.
.It
.Sy when
blocks are inherited: a parent personality's
.Sy when
blocks are applied first, then the child's.
.El
.Pp
Requires
.Sy version = \(dq0.4\(dq
or later in the config file.
.Ss argv[0] dispatch
When
.Nm lx
is invoked via a symlink whose name matches a personality, that
personality is applied automatically.
For example, if
.Sy ll
is a symlink to
.Nm lx ,
running
.Sy ll
is equivalent to
.Sy lx -pll .
.Sh THEMES
A theme defines colours for UI elements.
Themes are selected through personalities
.Pq Sy theme = \(dqNAME\(dq
or the
.Sy --theme= Ns Ar NAME
CLI flag.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[theme.ocean]
inherits = "exa"
directory = "bold dodgerblue"
executable = "bold springgreen"
symlink = "mediumturquoise"
date = "steelblue"
.Ed
.Ss Structural fields
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy inherits
Inherit from another theme.
The parent's UI keys are applied first; this theme's keys override.
The special name
.Sy \(dqexa\(dq
refers to the compiled-in default theme.
Without
.Sy inherits ,
a theme starts from a blank slate.
.It Sy use-style
Name of a
.Sy [style.NAME]
set to apply.
.El
.Ss UI element keys
All other keys in a theme section set the colour for a specific UI
element.
Each key takes a colour value (see
.Sx COLOUR VALUES
below).
.Pp
.Sy File kinds\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy normal , directory , symlink , pipe , block-device , char-device , socket , special , executable .
.El
.Pp
.Sy Permissions\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy permissions-user-read , permissions-user-write , permissions-user-execute , permissions-user-execute-other , permissions-group-read , permissions-group-write , permissions-group-execute , permissions-other-read , permissions-other-write , permissions-other-execute , permissions-special-user , permissions-special-other , permissions-attribute .
.El
.Pp
The legacy short form
.Sy perm-user-read , perm-user-write , perm-user-exec ,
etc. is also accepted as an alias, as is
.Sy mode-user-read , mode-user-write , mode-user-exec ,
etc., matching the
.Fl -mode
flag alias and the
.Cm mode
sort field.
.Pp
.Sy Size\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy size-number-byte , size-number-kilo , size-number-mega , size-number-giga , size-number-huge , size-unit-byte , size-unit-kilo , size-unit-mega , size-unit-giga , size-unit-huge , size-number
(bulk: sets all number magnitudes),
.Sy size-unit
(bulk: sets all unit magnitudes),
.Sy size-major , size-minor .
.El
.Pp
.Sy Users\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy user-you , user-other , group-yours , group-member , group-other , uid-you , uid-other , gid-yours , gid-member , gid-other .
.El
.Pp
Group columns distinguish three tiers:
.Sy *-yours
(your primary group),
.Sy *-member
(a supplementary group you belong to), and
.Sy *-other
(not your group).
The
.Sy member
tier indicates you have group-permission access to the file.
.Pp
The
.Sy uid-*
and
.Sy gid-*
slots style the dedicated
.Sy --uid
and
.Sy --gid
columns.
All curated themes and the builtin default set all identity slots
explicitly.
.Pp
.Sy Links\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy links , links-multi .
.El
.Pp
.Sy VCS\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy vcs-new , vcs-modified , vcs-deleted , vcs-renamed , vcs-typechange , vcs-ignored , vcs-conflicted .
.El
.Pp
.Sy UI elements\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Sy punctuation , inode , blocks , header , octal , symlink-path , control-char , broken-symlink , broken-overlay .
.El
.Pp
.Sy Timestamps (age-based gradient)\&:
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It Sy date
bulk setter \(em sets all tiers at once on every timestamp column
.It Sy date-now
< 1 hour
.It Sy date-today
< 24 hours
.It Sy date-week
< 7 days
.It Sy date-month
< 30 days
.It Sy date-year
< 365 days
.It Sy date-old
> 1 year
.It Sy date-flat
the single colour each timestamp column uses when its gradient is
disabled
.El
.Pp
Setting
.Sy date
alone is backwards compatible \(em all timestamps render in the same
colour, including the flat fallback.
Setting individual tiers creates a gradient that shows file age at a
glance, and
.Sy date-flat
lets a theme define what colour the column collapses to when the
gradient is turned off.
.Pp
.Sy Per-timestamp-column overrides\&:
Each of the four timestamp columns
.Pq Cm modified , accessed , changed , created
can be themed independently.
For each column, the same eight slots exist with a
.Sy date- Ns Ar col Ns Sy -
prefix:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
date-modified             (bulk for the modified column)
date-modified-now
date-modified-today
date-modified-week
date-modified-month
date-modified-year
date-modified-old
date-modified-flat
.Ed
.Pp
The same eight keys exist for
.Sy date-accessed-* ,
.Sy date-changed-* ,
and
.Sy date-created-*
(32 per-column keys total).
Per-column overrides write directly to the named field; only the
unprefixed
.Sy date-*
keys above fan out to all four columns at once.
.Pp
.Sy Fall-through is automatic.
.Nm lx
applies theme keys by specificity: the bulk
.Sy date = ...
setter first, then bulk per-tier setters
.Pq Sy date-now , date-today , No ... ,
then bulk per-column setters
.Pq Sy date-modified , date-accessed , No ... ,
then per-column per-tier overrides
.Pq Sy date-modified-now , No ... .
This means you can write them in any order in the theme block \(em
the most specific key always wins.
Example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[theme.example]
date              = "blue"           # every column, every tier
date-now          = "bright cyan"    # now-tier on every column
date-modified-now = "bright green"   # only the modified column's now
.Ed
.Pp
End state: the modified column's
.Sy now
tier is bright green, the other three columns'
.Sy now
tiers are bright cyan, and every other tier on every column is blue.
.Ss The compiled-in "exa" theme
The special theme name
.Sy \(dqexa\(dq
provides the following defaults.
Use
.Sy inherits = \(dqexa\(dq
and override individual keys to customise:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[theme.exa]
# File kinds
normal = ""
directory = "bold blue"
symlink = "cyan"
pipe = "yellow"
block-device = "bold yellow"
char-device = "bold yellow"
socket = "bold red"
special = "yellow"
executable = "bold green"

# Permissions
permissions-user-read = "bold yellow"
permissions-user-write = "bold red"
permissions-user-execute = "bold underline green"
permissions-user-execute-other = "bold green"
permissions-group-read = "yellow"
permissions-group-write = "red"
permissions-group-execute = "green"
permissions-other-read = "yellow"
permissions-other-write = "red"
permissions-other-execute = "green"
permissions-special-user = "purple"
permissions-special-other = "purple"
permissions-attribute = ""

# Size (set per-tier keys size-number-byte..huge for a
# gradient; see --gradient(1) to switch the gradient on/off)
size-number = "bold green"
size-unit = "green"
size-major = "bold green"
size-minor = "green"

# Users and groups
user-you = "bold yellow"
user-other = ""
group-yours = "bold yellow"
group-other = ""

# Links
links = "bold red"
links-multi = "bold red"

# VCS status
vcs-new = "green"
vcs-modified = "blue"
vcs-deleted = "red"
vcs-renamed = "yellow"
vcs-typechange = "purple"
vcs-ignored = "dimmed"
vcs-conflicted = "red"

# UI elements
punctuation = "38;5;244"
date = "blue"
inode = "purple"
blocks = "cyan"
header = "underline"
octal = "purple"
symlink-path = "cyan"
control-char = "red"
broken-symlink = "red"
broken-overlay = "underline"
.Ed
.Sh CLASSES
The
.Sy [class]
section defines named lists of glob patterns that represent
file-type categories.
Classes are referenced from styles (see below).
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[class]
source = ["*.rs", "*.py", "*.js", "*.go", "*.c"]
data   = ["*.csv", "*.json", "*.xml", "*.yaml"]
.Ed
.Pp
User-defined classes in
.Sy [class]
override any compiled-in definition of the same name.
.Ss Compiled-in class definitions
.Nm lx
ships with the following compiled-in classes.
To override one, redefine it in
.Sy [class]
with the same name.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
image:
    *.png *.jfi *.jfif *.jif *.jpe *.jpeg *.jpg *.gif *.bmp
    *.tiff *.tif *.ppm *.pgm *.pbm *.pnm *.webp *.raw *.arw
    *.svg *.stl *.eps *.dvi *.ps *.cbr *.jpf *.cbz *.xpm
    *.ico *.cr2 *.orf *.nef *.heif *.avif *.jxl *.j2k *.jp2
    *.j2c *.jpx

video:
    *.avi *.flv *.m2v *.m4v *.mkv *.mov *.mp4 *.mpeg *.mpg
    *.ogm *.ogv *.vob *.wmv *.webm *.m2ts *.heic

music:
    *.aac *.m4a *.mp3 *.ogg *.wma *.mka *.opus

lossless:
    *.alac *.ape *.flac *.wav

crypto:
    *.asc *.enc *.gpg *.pgp *.sig *.signature *.pfx *.p12

document:
    *.djvu *.doc *.docx *.dvi *.eml *.eps *.fotd *.key
    *.keynote *.numbers *.odp *.odt *.pages *.pdf *.ppt
    *.pptx *.rtf *.xls *.xlsx

compressed:
    *.zip *.tar *.Z *.z *.gz *.bz2 *.a *.ar *.7z *.iso *.dmg
    *.tc *.rar *.par *.tgz *.xz *.txz *.lz *.tlz *.lzma
    *.deb *.rpm *.zst *.lz4 *.cpio

compiled:
    *.class *.elc *.hi *.o *.pyc *.zwc *.ko

temp:
    *.tmp *.swp *.swo *.swn *.bak *.bkp *.bk

immediate:
    Makefile Cargo.toml SConstruct CMakeLists.txt build.gradle
    pom.xml Rakefile package.json Gruntfile.js Gruntfile.coffee
    BUILD BUILD.bazel WORKSPACE build.xml Podfile
    webpack.config.js meson.build composer.json RoboFile.php
    PKGBUILD Justfile Procfile Dockerfile Containerfile
    Vagrantfile Brewfile Gemfile Pipfile build.sbt mix.exs
    bsconfig.json tsconfig.json
.Ed
.Sh STYLES
Named sets of file colour rules, referenced from themes via
.Sy use-style = \(dqNAME\(dq .
.Pp
Styles can reference classes using bare dotted TOML keys, or match
files directly using quoted keys:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy class.NAME = \(dqcolour\(dq
Reference a named class.
Applies the colour to every pattern in the class definition.
.It Sy \(dq*.ext\(dq = \(dqcolour\(dq
Glob pattern (quoted key containing metacharacters
.Sq * ,
.Sq \&? ,
.Sq \&[ ) .
.It Sy \(dqMakefile\(dq = \(dqcolour\(dq
Exact filename match (quoted key without metacharacters).
.El
.Pp
All file pattern keys
.Em must be quoted .
Bare unquoted keys are reserved for class references.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
[style.exa]
class.temp       = "38;5;244"
class.immediate  = "bold underline yellow"
class.image      = "38;5;133"
class.video      = "38;5;135"
class.music      = "38;5;92"
class.lossless   = "38;5;93"
class.crypto     = "38;5;109"
class.document   = "38;5;105"
class.compressed = "red"
class.compiled   = "38;5;137"

[style.dev]
class.source     = "#ff8700"
"*.toml"         = "sandybrown"
"*.md"           = "cornflowerblue"
"Makefile"       = "bold underline yellow"
"Cargo.toml"     = "bold #ff8700"
.Ed
.Pp
The compiled-in
.Sy \(dqexa\(dq
style provides default file-type colouring.
To disable it, use a theme that references a different style (or no
style at all).
If two classes have overlapping patterns, the result is unspecified.
.Sh COLOUR VALUES
Colour values in themes and style sets accept a space-separated
string of modifiers and a colour specifier.
Tokens may appear in any order.
.Pp
.Sy Modifiers\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Cm bold ,
.Cm dimmed Pq alias Cm dim ,
.Cm italic ,
.Cm underline ,
.Cm strikethrough ,
.Cm blink ,
.Cm reverse ,
.Cm hidden .
.El
.Pp
.Sy Named ANSI colours\&:
.Bl -item -offset indent -compact
.It
.Cm black ,
.Cm red ,
.Cm green ,
.Cm yellow ,
.Cm blue ,
.Cm purple Pq alias Cm magenta ,
.Cm cyan ,
.Cm white .
.El
.Pp
.Sy X11/CSS colour names\&:
The full set of ~148 standard X11 colour names is supported
(case-insensitive).
Examples:
.Cm tomato ,
.Cm cornflowerblue ,
.Cm darkslategray ,
.Cm dodgerblue ,
.Cm springgreen ,
.Cm salmon ,
.Cm peru ,
.Cm steelblue ,
.Cm wheat .
.Pp
.Sy Hex\&:
.Sy #RRGGBB
or
.Sy #RGB .
Examples:
.Sy #ff8700 ,
.Sy #f00 .
.Pp
.Sy 256-colour\&:
Raw ANSI 256-colour code:
.Sy 38;5\&; Ns Ar NUMBER
(foreground) or
.Sy 48;5\&; Ns Ar NUMBER
(background).
Example:
.Sy 38;5;208 .
.Pp
.Sy RGB\&:
Raw ANSI true-colour code:
.Sy 38;2\&; Ns Ar R;G;B
(foreground) or
.Sy 48;2\&; Ns Ar R;G;B
(background).
Example:
.Sy 38;2;255;135;0 .
.Pp
Modifiers can be combined with any colour specifier:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
"bold blue"
"bold underline red"
"dimmed cyan"
"bold #ff8700"
"bold tomato"
"italic 38;5;208"
.Ed
.Pp
A value containing only modifiers (e.g.
.Sy \(dqbold underline\(dq )
uses the terminal's default foreground colour.
.Sh PRECEDENCE
Colour settings are resolved in the following order, from lowest to
highest priority:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
.Sy Built-in defaults
\(em the compiled-in exa theme.
.It
.Ev LS_COLORS
\(em standard file-type colour scheme.
.It
.Sy Theme
\(em config-file theme (selected via personality or
.Sy --theme ) .
The theme's UI element keys and style set colours override all
environment variable settings.
.El
.Pp
Within a theme,
.Sy inherits
is resolved first (parent applied, then child overrides).
Style sets referenced by
.Sy use-style
are applied after UI element keys.
The compiled-in
.Sy \(dqexa\(dq
style provides default file-type colouring; to disable it, use a
theme that references a different style or no style at all.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr lx 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm lx
is maintained by
.An Johann Visagie ,
based on exa by
.An Benjamin Sago .
Source code:
.Lk https://github.com/wjv/lx
